# A Variational Algorithm for Continuous-Time Modeling
This is the repository for a python implementation of the algorithm presented in the book chapter ***A
Variational Approach to Continuous Time Dynamic Models*** by **Hannes Meinlschmidt,
Meike Sons and Mark Stemmler**. The implementation was written by **Hannes
Meinlschmidt** to which questions and comments are welcome at **meinlschmidt
at math.fau.de**. 

See below for instructions regarding reproducing the results from the book chapter.
 
> [!WARNING]
> A word of warning: I have tried to put reasonable comments in the code but it
> is an organically grown code. Probably there are several rather inefficient and
> inelegant solutions in there, not to speak of possible bugs. However, the main
> functionality should definitely be correct. Eventually I would consider
> rewriting large aspects of the code to facilitate usage also on other examples.

## What the algorithm does
In a nutshell: It is an optimization
algorithm which, given sets of data, each
consisting of a number of points in space, determines a quadratic
matrix driving a linear ordinary differential equation such that the trajectories
generated by the differential equation match the points in space in a
least-squares optimal way over the whole data set. It can also optimize for
so-called intercepts, that is, forcing functions in the differential
equations. The optimizer used is a BFGS algorithm from scipy which is fed
with a gradient for the least-squares objective function which was calculated
analytically by adjoint calculus. Details can be found in the book chapter or
in forthcoming publications.

## Requirements
The code was written and tested within **python 3.10** and I do not give any
guarantees that it works on other versions.

## How the reproduce the results from the book chapter
> [!IMPORTANT]
> In the book chapter, we applied the algorithm to a particular set of data from
> the [German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP)](https://www.diw.de/en/diw_01.c.615551.en/research_infrastructure__socio-economic_panel__soep.html)
> which is mainted by the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW
> Berlin). Usage of the SOEP data is free of charge for anyone working at a
> scientific research institution, but unfortunately, per the contract with DIW
> Berlin I am not allowed to supply the data file directly within this
> repository, so you need to request access to the SOEP data yourself. That being
> said, in the **data_processed** folder there is a python snippet which processes the rather
> unwieldly large SOEP **pl.csv** file to filter only the relevant columns for our
> application case. The algorithm then works on the thus produced
> **pl_filtered.csv** file.

Once you have the **pl_filtered.csv** file in the **data_processed** folder, you can reproduce the
results in the book chapter with
```
python VarCT_optimize.py
```
This will select the default number of **1%** of participants in the data randomly and
use these in the algorithm. To change this number, use the `-td percent` command line
interface, e.g.
```
python VarCT_optimize.py -td 10
```
to select **10%** of participants randomly.

